---
layout: post
title: "Friend of a Friend of Teju"
persona: "Teju Prasad"
description: "As a web developer, I'd like to try using Neo4j for a Friend-of-a-Friend query."
category: actual
from: unaware
to: interested
duration: 1 hour
tags: [web, dev]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

## Scenario

As (actual) Teju Prasad, my company Oodle is having "friend of a friend" issues. My friend Philip Rathle works for Neo4j and
has recommended that I give it a try to learn how it can help.

**Goal**: Try using Neo4j for a Friend-of-a-Friend (foaf) query

Steps:

 * create nodes for me, a friend and friend of that friend
 * relate them
 * perform a foaf query

Prep:

Going in, we spent 5-10 minutes discussing graph databases, discussing concept of “the data is the schema”, the concept of nodes having optinoal properties. She also skimmed the Mashable article. She totally gets graph vs. tabular data.

Constraints:

 * Windows 7 Lenovo PC

## Transcript


* 2:30 PM: Google  Neo4j
* “Oh wow, taking a long time” (1 min 30 for 36 MB file).  Switched to Facebook.  Checking email.  Write a could emails.  Flip back.
* Download complete.
* Google “install Neo4j”
* Google “install Neo4j locally on Windows”
* Back to download page.  note: looking for instructions
* Google search on Maven
* Back to download page.  Spoken out loud: “so it’s all written in Java”
* Opened zip file
* AVG firewall comes up with warning. She clicks through.  Hit OK faster than I could see.  I asked what it was.  She said probably a marketing cookie/tracker.
* Open readme
* open DOS prompt
* cut & paste “neo4j start”
* Windows security prompt
* opened web UI.  “wow it’s up.” … then ..” now I have no idea what to do”
* (this is about 8 minutes in, from the initial Google search)
* Opened manual (from neo4j.org Docs link)
* Google “neo4j tutorial”, brought her into section 4 of the docs.  Went into section 4.2: “Hello World”.  Looks Java-ish.  “Maybe I want something restful”.  “No way to build a database and just access through a browser”?  Now looking at chapter 6, then 3... spending
* “I don’t actually understand this graph in the tutorial.  I don’t understand what it means for a file to be related to another file.  The symbolic link makes sense.  Are these directories?
* brief stop at section 3.5 (for a couple seconds)
* Now back to the web UI.  Over to Console.  Back to the manual.
* 2:46 PM.  Sigh of exasperation.  Flipping around manual.  Back to chap 4 and section 4.2.1.  Centered around Java API.
* Google for “set classpath in Windows”.  (She said earlier that she normally doesn’t develop in Windows, but uses Win machine as terminal into Linux)
* After 1-2 minutes, another Google search for “set classpath in Windows 7”. 
* opened System Properties, env variables.  Looking at 4.1.1: “Add neo4j to build path”
* Closed env variables (didn’t make any changes)
* Looking inside zip file.  Looking for location of lib directory so that she can paste into classpath
* Looking at the “Java embedded setup” portion of the docs
* back to Console.  Clicked on the “shell documentation” link.  27.6.3 in the docs
* back to neo4j.org tab for a couple seconds (which was open).  Closed the tab
* back to 4.2.2 “Prepare the database”.  Scanning quickly.  Clearly not findnig what she wants.
* “It would be nice to have something I could just copy and paste and run”
* Opened Komodo (which she uses for PHP).  Copying stuff in from the tutorial. 4.2.2, 4.2.3, etc.
* back to command line.  javac.  Doesn’t seem to be in the path.  (Java not installed.  Doesn’t normally use this machine for development.)
* It’s now 3 PM
* “I don’t have Java installed.  Will take too much time”
* making a suggestion: A lot of people on Github have a samples directory with sample code, and a tutorial for that file
* I’m stuck.
* PPR:  “Ok, what if I were to tell you that you could create nodes & relationships through the web UI without writing any code.”
* Found the doc in 26.2.  “Oh, there’s a data tab”
* “I can add a node.  That’s pretty cool.”  Added a node.
* now referring back to the Java code example that she’s pasted into Komodo.  “Nodes have unique names”
* Added a property. name=”Teju”
* added a second node. name=”philip”
* added node.  “3” appeared in the data browser.  Clicks “search”.  node 3 shows up. looks suprised.
* then 4, node 4 appears.  tries to click on this. “I don’t understand what clicking on this does” ….  “it looks like it’s adding nodes”
* clicking into “find” box.  Sees Cypher query to return node zero.  Executes.  
* Clicks on add node several times.  number goes up progressively to “8”.
* from node Taju to Philip, type Friend.
* “so I guess clicking on “node” so many times did create a node for me”
* back to manual
* “it’s not showing me how to edit a node”
* types “Teju” in the search bar, then search.
* There are now 11 nodes
* types “11:Teju” in the search bar, then search.
* creates and edits node 11.  name=Teju
* visualizer shows relationship “RELATED_TO” between 11 and 1.  11 and relationship are greyed out. Tries to click on relationships.  Nothing happens.
* note: she’s moving really fast - hard to keep up
* Adds relationship property “fof”
* Seems to have figured out that typing a node ID in the search bar brings back that node id.
* now has `11-[friend_of]->1-[friend_of]->2`
* has figured out to search for relationships by “rels:11” - except she’s using that to search for the relationship connected to node 11
* keeps trying to click on the relationship in the diagram
* “maybe I should add one more friend to 1”
* added relationship “Friend of” between nodes 1 and 3
* add property name=”Sunil” to node 3
* note: from the point where she started playing with the interactive web UI, she hasn’t been using the documentation
* “It would be useful to start with the graphical user interface... or to start with a file that you can load, that lets you play around
* Back to the docs.  Looking at 26.2 in the docs “Browsing Data”
* Now at 27.8: “an example shell session”
* it is now 3:13 PM.  It’s been 45 minutes
* Loops back to executing default Cypher query that brings back node zero.  Executes.  Sees “returned 1 row”.  Asks “Where is the result of the query”
* goes to console.  Types “pwd”
* copies “start n=node 0” from the documentation, into clipboard
* goes to console.  Types “cd 2”
* ls -avr
* returns `(me)<--[:FriendsOF,1]=(Philip,1)`
* cd 1
* le -avr
* returns all ndoes & relationships
* “I guess this think only allows you to traverse one node or relationship at a time”
* Jumped to chapter 15 (Cypher).  Flipping around.  Paused on figure 15.1 Example Graph.  Reading the text below it with a sample fof query
* pasted the fof query into query box.  Editing variables to match names in her graph. (It uses an auto index, so she’s setting herself up for trouble)
* Types 2 and search.  Returned one row.  Doesn’t present option for editig.  Switched views (top right icon).
* Google search on “neo4j node_auto_index”
* lands on 18.12.1.  Example shows use of auto index with REST API.
* It is now 3:21 PM
* Now on 27.6.10 Indexing
* types index -i name in the console.  Returns ““.  Seems surprised.  Back to reading the docs.  27.6.10 (adding indexes to command line)
* cd -a 2
* index -i name, amdee
* returns “No value to index”
* index -i name, name
* query now says START amdee=node:name(name … couldn’t get it all
* tries adding comments to start of query (//) to debug
* Realized the relationship types are probably cap sensitive.  Changed the capitalizatoin.
* Now query runs, but “no data found”
* This the query:
    ```
	START amdee=node:name(name = "amdee")
	MATCH amdee-[:FriendOF]->()-[:FriendOF]->fof
	RETURN amdee, fof
	```
* “Is it because the relationship are directional?” She remembers reading that directionality doesn’t matter.
* I explained how directionality works in Cypher (i.e. remove the arrow). She did. Query now returns 2 rows.
* It’s now 3:27 PM. Wrapping up.
